---
title: "Emerging Extrinsic Dexterity in Cluttered Scenes via Dynamics-aware Policy Learning"
collection: publications
category: conferences
permalink: /publication/2026-04-27-dapl
excerpt: 'We introduce a Dynamics-Aware Policy Learning (DAPL) framework'
date: 2026-04-27
venue: 'arXiv preprint'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.09882'
citation: 'Zheng, Y., Lyu, J., Zhang, Y., Chen, J., Yan, M., Deng, Y., Shi, X., Zhao, X., Wang, Y., Zhang, Z., & Wang, H. (2026). "Emerging Extrinsic Dexterity in Cluttered Scenes via Dynamics-aware Policy Learning." <i>arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.09882</i>.'
---

**Abstract:**

Extrinsic dexterity leverages environmental contact to overcome the limitations of prehensile manipulation. However, achieving such dexterity in cluttered scenes remains challenging and underexplored, as it requires selectively exploiting contact among multiple interacting objects with inherently coupled dynamics. Existing approaches lack explicit modeling of such complex dynamics and therefore fall short in non-prehensile manipulation in cluttered environments, which in turn limits their practical applicability in real-world environments. In this paper, we introduce a Dynamics-Aware Policy Learning (DAPL) framework that can facilitate policy learning with a learned representation of contact-induced object dynamics in cluttered environments. This representation is learned through explicit world modeling and used to condition reinforcement learning, enabling extrinsic dexterity to emerge without hand-crafted contact heuristics or complex reward shaping. We evaluate our approach in both simulation and the real world. Our method outperforms prehensile manipulation, human teleoperation, and prior representation-based policy by over 25% in success rate on unseen simulated cluttered scenes with varying densities. Real-world success reaches around 50% across 10 cluttered scenes, while a practical grocery deployment further demonstrates robust sim-to-real transfer and applicability.
